Version 1.11.8, 2014-02-13
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* The `botan` command line application introduced in 1.11.7 is now
  installed along with the library.

* A bug in certificate path validation introduced in 1.11.6 which
  caused all CRL signature checks to fail has been corrected.

* The ChaCha20 stream cipher has been added.

* The ``Transformation`` class no longer implements an interface for keying,
  this has been moved to a new subclass ``Keyed_Transformation``.

* The ``Algorithm`` class, which previously acted as a global base for
  various types (ciphers, hashes, etc) has been removed.

* CMAC now supports 256 and 512 bit block ciphers, which also allows
  the use of larger block ciphers with EAX mode. In particular this
  allows using Threefish in EAX mode.

* The antique PBES1 private key encryption scheme (which only supports
  DES or 64-bit RC2) has been removed.

* The Square, Skipjack, and Luby-Rackoff block ciphers have been removed.

* The Blue Midnight Wish hash function has been removed.

* Skein-512 no longer supports output lengths greater than 512 bits.

* Skein did not reset its internal state properly if clear() was
  called, causing it to produce incorrect results for the following
  message. It was reset correctly in final() so most usages should not
  be affected.

* A number of public key padding schemes have been renamed to match
  the most common notation; for instance EME1 is now called OAEP and
  EMSA4 is now called PSSR. Aliases are set which should allow all
  current applications to continue to work unmodified.

* A bug in CFB encryption caused a few bytes past the end of the final
  block to be read. The actual output was not affected.

* Fix compilation errors in the tests that occured with minimized
  builds. Contributed by Markus Wanner.

* Add a new ``--destdir`` option to ``configure.py`` which controls
  where the install target will place the output. The ``--prefix``
  option continues to set the location where the library expects to be
  eventually installed.

* Many class destructors which previously deleted memory have been
  removed in favor of using ``unique_ptr``.

* Various portability fixes for Clang, Windows, Visual C++ 2013, OS X,
  and x86-32.
