Version 1.11.9, 2014-04-10
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Fix a bug in primality testing introduced in 1.8.3 which caused
  only a single random base, rather than a sequence of random bases,
  to be used in the Miller-Rabin test. This increased the probability
  that a non-prime would be accepted. Reported by Jeff Marrison.

* X.509 path validation now returns a set of all errors that occurred
  during validation, rather than immediately returning the first
  detected error. This prevents a seemingly innocuous error (such as
  an expired certificate) from hiding an obviously serious error
  (such as an invalid signature). The Certificate_Status_Code enum is
  now ordered by severity, and the most severe error is returned by
  Path_Validation_Result::result(). The entire set of status codes is
  available with the new all_statuses call.

* Fixed a bug in OCSP response decoding which would cause an error
  when attempting to decode responses from some widely used
  responders.

* An implementation of HMAC_DRBG RNG from NIST SP800-90A has been
  added. Like the X9.31 PRNG implementation, it uses another
  underlying RNG for seeding material.

* An implementation of the RFC 6979 deterministic nonce generator has
  been added.

* Fix a bug in certificate path validation which prevented successful
  validation if intermediate certificates were presented out of order.

* Fix a bug introduced in 1.11.5 which could cause crashes or other
  incorrect behavior when a cipher mode filter was followed in the
  pipe by another filter, and that filter had a non-empty start_msg.

* The types.h header now uses stdint.h rather than cstdint to avoid
  problems with Clang on OS X.
