Version 1.9.17, 2011-04-29
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Third release candidate for 1.10.0

* The format preserving encryption method currently available was
  presented in the header ``fpe.h`` and the functions ``fpe_encrypt``
  and ``fpe_decrypt``. These were renamed as it is likely that other
  FPE schemes will be included in the future. The header is now
  ``fpe_fe1.h``, and the functions are named ``fe1_encrypt`` and
  ``fe1_decrypt``.

* New options to ``configure.py`` control what tools are used for
  documentation generation. The ``--with-sphinx`` option enables using
  Sphinx to convert ReST into HTML; otherwise the ReST sources are
  installed directly. If ``--with-doxygen`` is used, Doxygen will run
  as well. Documentation generation can be triggered via the ``docs``
  target in the makefile; it will also be installed by the install
  target on Unix.

* A bug in 1.9.16 effectively disabled support for runtime CPU feature
  detection on x86 under GCC in that release.

* A mostly internal change, all references to "ia32" and "amd64" have
  been changed to the vendor neutral and probably easier to understand
  "x86-32" and "x86-64". For instance, the "mp_amd64" module has been
  renamed "mp_x86_64", and the macro indicating x86-32 has changed
  from ``BOTAN_TARGET_ARCH_IS_IA32`` to
  ``BOTAN_TARGET_ARCH_IS_X86_32``. The classes calling assembly have
  also been renamed.

* Similiarly to the above change, the AES implemenations using the
  AES-NI instruction set have been renamed from AES_XXX_Intel to
  AES_XXX_NI.

* Systems that are identified as `sun4u` will default to compiling for
  32-bit SPARCv9 code rather than 64-bit. This matches the still
  common convention for 32-bit SPARC userspaces. If you want 64-bit
  code on such as system, use ``--cpu=sparc64``.

* Some minor fixes for compiling botan under the BeOS
  clone/continuation `Haiku <http://haiku-os.org>`_.

* Further updates to the documentation

