Version 1.9.16, 2011-04-11
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Second release candidate for 1.10.0

* The documentation, previously written in LaTeX, is now in
  reStructuredText suitable for processing by `Sphinx
  <http://sphinx.pocoo.org>`_, which can generate nicely formatted
  HTML and PDFs. The documentation has also been greatly updated and
  expanded.

* The class ``EC_Domain_Params`` has been renamed ``EC_Group``, with a
  typedef for backwards compatability.

* ``EC_Group``'s string constructor didn't understand the standard
  names like "secp160r1", forcing use of the OIDs.

* Two constructors for ECDSA private keys, the one that creates a new
  random key, and the one that provides a preset private key as a
  ``BigInt``, have been merged. This matches the existing interface
  for DSA and DH keys. If you previously used the version taking a
  ``BigInt`` private key, you'll have to additionally pass in a
  ``RandomNumberGenerator`` object starting in this release.

* It is now possible to create ECDH keys with a preset ``BigInt``
  private key; previously no method for this was available.

* The overload of ``generate_passhash9`` that takes an explicit
  algorithm identifier has been merged with the one that does not.
  The algorithm identifier code has been moved from the second
  parameter to the fourth.

* Change shared library versioning to match the normal Unix
  conventions. Instead of ``libbotan-X.Y.Z.so``, the shared lib is
  named ``libbotan-X.Y.so.Z``; this allows the runtime linker to do
  its runtime linky magic. It can be safely presumed that any change
  in the major or minor version indicates ABI incompatability.

* Remove the socket wrapper code; it was not actually used by anything
  in the library, only in the examples, and you can use whatever kind
  of (blocking) socket interface you like with the SSL/TLS code. It's
  available as socket.h in the examples directory if you want to use
  it.

* Disable the by-default 'strong' checking of private keys that are
  loaded from storage. You can always request key material sanity
  checking using Private_Key::check_key.

* Bring back removed functions ``min_keylength_of``,
  ``max_keylength_of``, ``keylength_multiple_of`` in ``lookup.h`` to
  avoid breaking applications written against 1.8

